# OGD-on-BMI-communities
This reposity is affiliated with the manuscript **"The Legacy of Conventional Oil and Gas Development Outweighs Shale Gas Impacts on Stream Biodiversity"** submitted to ES&T Water in Jan 2026.
This study used several methods of analysis to quantify the relationship between oil and gas development (OGD) and benthic macroinvertebrates (BMI) within the Appalachian Plateau region of Pennsylvania. By identifying wells as either conventional or unconventional (employing horizontal drilling and/or hydraulic fracturing) we also investigate whether the BMI communities respond differently to different extraction methods. Community composition was quantified with taxonomic functional and co-occurence network structures metrics, and relationships with OGD were tested using linear mixed-effect modeling. 

BMI data, publicly available through the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP), was downloaded on 7/1/2024. OGD data was downloaded from several sources and the information needed for this study (location, well type, and API number) was aggregated into a single dataset. Both of these datasets are available in the data/ folder. BMI sampling locations were processed through the USGS StreamStats API to delineate catchment areas and calculate basin characteristic and then geospatially joined to OGD locations to determine the number of wells within each catchment. Additionally, co-occurrence networks were generated in R using the netassoc package using methodology established by [Simons 2019](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ece3.5751), the source code for which is hosted in the github repository levisimons/SCCWRP. The final datasets used in analysis area available in download_and_preprocess/processed_datasets. Figures from the main text and SI showing the results of our analysis are stored in the figures/ folder. 



